confused about the cosmos can't tell a
planet from a star then give us just 5
minutes and we'll show you what they are
jack horkheimer stargazer tells you all
about the night sky and the biggest show
of all the universe and now this week's
episode the hunter's moon for 2010 and
use the moon to hunt for Jupiter hey
there stargazers I'm Chris tree this
month the moon will be doing double duty
as it first helps you to make sure you
know which bright light in the night sky
is Jupiter around October 19th and then
it will serve as this year's hunter's
moon on the twenty-second let me show
you okay we've got our skies set up for
October 18 8 30 p.m. facing southeast
now sometimes when stargazers see the
moon it's not always a welcome sight as
the moon can ruin an evening star gazing
but this month the moon will help you
find Jupiter Monday October 18th the
11-day old waxing gibbous moon will be
about 15 degrees to the right of Jupiter
or think of it this way find that big
bright moon in the southeast then look
down into the left of the moon and that
bright white light is the king of the
planets Jupiter the next night October
19th the moon will be a bit bigger and
brighter and even closer to Jupiter only
six degrees above it the moon will be
about 250,000 miles away and it's light
will take only one in the third seconds
to get here Jupiter will be 1,500 times
farther away than the moon 380 million
miles and you Pater's light will take
almost 34 minutes to reach us the next
night October 20th the moon will have
passed on beyond Jupiter but will still
be close enough that they can still be
used as a signpost for you Jupiter
gazers this October is an especially
good time to take a look at Jupiter
because it's just past opposition which
means Jupiter is still very close to
Earth which makes it even brighter and
bigger than usual another reason to take
a look at Jupiter this October is that
Jupiter's Great Red Spot is easier to
see in a small telescope or even with
binoculars because Jupiter has
temporarily at least lost one of the
dark equatorial bands that circle it the
South Equatorial band has faded since
last year at this time and with this
band out of the way the Great Red Spot
is easier to see this fading of the
equatorial belt has happened before but
Jupiter on immers don't fully understand
why it happens and an even better reason
to keep watching Jupiter is that this
South Equatorial band will likely
reappear quickly with little or no
warning again no one can tell you quite
wide maybe you'll be the astronomer who
will figure it out now let's switch
gears and talk about the moon before
you'll see rising in the East after
sunset on Friday October 22nd is
traditionally called the Hunter's Moon
and it's the next full moon after the
harvest moon its name refers to the time
after the harvest has been finished when
the fields have been cleared which makes
it easier for hunters to see and catch
animals and birds to add to the harvest
feast now four moons happen on average
every 29 and a half days so they don't
match the months exactly in fact some
years have 13 full moons the moon has
been credited with all kinds of
influence on human affairs but none of
it stands up to scientific scrutiny
because the moon has such a strong
influence on the tides in the ocean it's
often wrongly assumed that the moon has
a strong influence on us as well the
reality is far different a mother
holding her child will exert 12 million
times as much tidal force on her child
as the moon but the moon still gets
flamed anyway so use the moon to verify
which light in the sky is the planet
Jupiter on October eighteenth nineteenth
and twentieth then go out Friday night
and enjoy the Hunter's Moon October 22nd
keep looking up
make the Stars your own is available on
DVD or VHS for 1995 in addition
stargazing with jack horkheimer cosmic
comics for the Sky Watcher is also
available for 1995